The body

The concept of ‘the body’ is closely related to the ideas of ‘illness’ and ‘health’. All of us exist in ‘bodies’ of different shapes, heights, colours, and physical abilities. The main reasons for the differences are genetic, and the fact that people’s bodies change as they age. However, a huge range of research indicates that there are social factors too.

According to various studies, poorer people are more likely to eat ‘unhealthy’ foods, to smoke cigarettes, and to be employed in repetitive, physically difficult work, or the opposite: boring, inactive employment. In contrast, the wealthy have more money to purchase nutritious food, thus lowering the risk of certain diseases such as malnutrition. However, it is well-known that having too much food to consume can lead to unexpected health issues, including obesity. Moreover, for poor people, their housing conditions and neighborhoods tend to be worse. All of these factors impact upon the condition of a person’s health: the physical shapes of bodies are strongly influenced by social factors.

There are other types of social factors too. Bodies are young or old, short or tall, big or small, weak or strong. The culture and media of different societies promote very different valuations of body shapes. What is considered as attractive or ugly, normal or abnormal varies enormously. Currently, for example, in rich societies, the idea of slimness is highly valued, but historically this was different. In most societies, the ideal body shape for a woman was a ‘full figure’ with a noticeable belly, while in middle-aged men, a large stomach indicated that they were financially successful in life.

Social factors are also closely linked to emotional well-being. Numerous studies have found that people with low or no incomes are more likely to have mental health problems. It is not clear, however, whether poverty causes mental illness, or whether it is the other way around. For example, certain people with mental health issues may be at risk of becoming homeless, just as a person who is homeless may have an increased risk of illnesses such as depression.

It is easy for people to feel undervalued because of factors they have no power to change, for example, their age and height. Equally, they can feel pressured into making changes to their appearance - when it is possible to make such changes. This has been shown to lead to obsessions with weight loss and fitness level in extreme cases.
